i hope you guys enjoyed this episode
brought to you by our sponsors
at athletic greens to receive a free
one-year supply of vitamin d and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase
visit athleticgreens.com impact theory
enjoy the episode
[Music]
hey everybody what's up i'm tom bilyeu
and today we are going to be talking all
about overcoming negativity
this is something that i know a lot of
people struggle with
and it really is going to be the kind of
thing that holds you back but i've got
some really powerful
tips techniques strategies that are
going to help you guys
get past that and build the life that
you want for yourself
now i get asked about this a lot so i've
had a lot of questions come in and the
first one
goes like this how do you learn to love
forgive yourself
when you've done something in the past
you wouldn't forgive
someone else for doing i want to do and
be better
but seem to always come back because i
don't think i deserve the things i want
to achieve
okay so here we go i have
a very hard and fast rule that i use
when it comes to this idea of
self-punishment
now self-punishment can be very useful
but not when it gets to the point where
it is diminishing your sense of self
like what i see here when you
can't even let yourself believe that you
are worthy of
improving getting better and
accomplishing things we're now
officially in what i'll call a death
spiral
so the rule that i put in my life is
very simple and it allowed me to let
myself off the hook for things that i
had done in the past
and it goes like this every human being
should only ever do and believe
that which moves them towards their goal
now their goals should be both exciting
and honorable
meaning it should be exciting for you
but it should also
not just serve you but it should also
serve other people
so no matter who you are no matter what
you've done
pursuing a goal that is honorable that
uplifts
other people why on earth would you not
want yourself
to do that so if we can agree that
everybody
should be pursuing goals that are
honorable
and everybody should only allow
themselves to do and believe
the things that propel them down that
path to actually achieving that goal
now it's not about you it's just about
common sense
for human society for us as the human
animal to get
the most out of this experience and to
contribute
the most then we have to put ourselves
in a frame of mind that propels us down
that path
there were so many times in my life
where
i really believed that i was stupid or
i believed that i was unworthy or i
believed i needed to be
punished for something that i had done
and i would get in these loops of like
oh man
i'm not good enough i'm never going to
achieve this and why am i even bothering
and i realized that even though i would
ultimately get past it and be like look
just do it
i would waste so much time
in this beating myself up cycle so i
created that rule that i was only going
to do
and believe that which moved me towards
my goals so
now it's like am i good enough to do
this am i worthy
enough to do this do i deserve to have
something positive happen in my life
and the answer is i'm going to believe
that yes
i am good enough to pull this off yes i
am worthy of doing something like this
for two reasons one i'm only pursuing
things that are honorable in the first
place
and two such is the nature of the human
animal and the human experience
that we should all be getting ourselves
in a mental frame of reference that
propels us forward
and so i just let myself off the hook
that even if
i deserve to be punished it wasn't going
to move me towards my goal it wasn't
going to help me contribute to myself
which by the way nobody should feel bad
about contributing to themselves but it
really wasn't going to help me
contribute to other people
and as long as i felt good about the
things that i was trying to do and
create
it just made sense to let myself off the
hook so that i could take the actions
that i needed to take in order to
help in order to contribute in order to
thrive
so i use that rule all the time in my
life and i hope that you will
get as much value out of it as i have
all right the next question around
overcoming negativity
even though i have had lots of learnings
from my previous relationships
certain toxic ones have given me
experiences that override my logic and
optimism
and affect my current situation how do i
use the past as a source of knowledge
and use it to my advantage
in this case rather than see my current
relationship crumble because of my
assumptions
to all the negative things that can
happen lack of trust etc
okay this all comes down to what
is effective so if
thinking about all those negative things
is effective then we're going to do it
if letting those negative things go and
looking at the more optimistic side of
what could become what we could build
works then we're going to ignore it
we're going to
move forward now the reality is both
of those things are true you want to
look at where things went wrong you want
to
assess what the problem was that caused
for that mistake to happen in the first
place for the betrayal or whatever
may have occurred now the key is when
you look at this and say
ah there are bad people in the world
there are people that want to do me harm
then you've taken
a neutral incident this person
just to make it extreme this person
betrayed me
okay as shakespeare says there's nothing
either good or bad
but thinking makes it so you've made a
value judgment on that
now one way you could say is i uh
people are bad like as a defaults people
it is so
easy to go to the negative side to
cheat on somebody to take what you can
get to take advantage of the situation
that people are looking to lure me into
a sense of
um trust and then they're going to abuse
that trust and it's just the nature of
people
well the reality is that does exist
in human nature like we know that humans
can be incredibly selfish
but whatever you look for you're going
to find
so i want to introduce you to this idea
of it doesn't matter what you look at
it matters what you see and i'll push
that even farther and say it doesn't
matter what you look at
it matters what you choose to see
because the other way to look at that if
somebody betrays you is to say
oh my god that really sucked that hurt i
do not want to put myself in that
situation again
but i know how
hurt people can be how scared how
wounded how people can get
based on how they were raised and the
people that they've been around they can
get
these toxic patterns where they
destroyed the good things
in their own life like we had an amazing
relationship
and they ended up getting themselves
into uh a situation where they lacked
integrity where they couldn't be honest
and i know what it's like to be unable
to say the hard things i know what it's
like to get swept up
in you know uh the electricity of the
beginning of a relationship or
to be too afraid to invest in something
for the long term
and so with grace and compassion
though i'm not going to go back into
that relationship i actually understand
how they could end up there another way
to look at it and this is the one
that gets my vote is to say
all right this sucked i get it i get
that humans do dumb things i get that
humans can be hurtful
i'm not interested though in what my
partner did wrong
i'm only interested in what i can do
next time to avoid
the same mistakes without
diminishing the beauty that is a
relationship
now i have a fundamental belief that the
single greatest joy that anybody can
have in their life is to share a life
with somebody that they love and who
loves them that they trust and who trust
them
so i'm not going to give up on that
belief because it went
wrong one time two times three times
whatever i'm looking at what i can
control to make sure that i don't end up
back in that situation
now all three of these ways of looking
at it are
reasonable they're rational there is a
very strong argument to be made for any
of those three
right but only one of them empowers you
to move forward to take control of your
own life to make different choices next
time
even if it's just to say you know there
are issues in the way that i select
and do i need to go seek therapy to
figure out what it is
that draws me to people that are more
likely to betray me or to abuse me or
whatever the case may be
but these ultimately are identifiable
problems
and solvable problems and given that
they are identifiable and solvable
problems
i want to stay in the driver's seat
which means i have to take
responsibility for my actions
now that doesn't mean that i'm beating
myself up and you know playing the blame
game it just means i'm retaining control
which is extraordinarily powerful so i
want to go back to that idea of
it doesn't matter what you look at it
matters what you see i'm going to choose
to see
what i could do differently in order to
get a different result
and because i believe that one of the
the i mean for me the belief is the most
beautiful thing that you can ever hope
to get in life
is to love and be loved to somebody that
loves you back
that you trust and they trust you and
that takes a lot of work but it's
amazing and it's worth that effort
so i'm going to retain control all right
that's how i would look at it
not just that particular example but
that's how i look at basically
everything
in my life all right next question
how do you know when something is
actually negative or a warning
sometimes when you embark on a journey
there are so many voices within
how do i then learn to separate
negativity from fear all alright this is
amazing
this is a question about self-awareness
now
all of the you know self-improvement
talk
in the world is useless if you don't
learn to
become self-aware now here's the great
news this
is a process now there are certainly
some people
that take to it a little bit more easily
and maybe you really struggle with
self-awareness
but i'm going to walk you quickly
through the process of how to gain
some more self-awareness so it goes like
this in your body there's this thing
called the vagus nerve
the vagus nerve is the biggest nerve in
your body
the vagus nerve runs all over everywhere
touches every system
goes into your gut down your limbs
everything
now most people think of the body
as the brain telling your body what to
do and then a little bit of information
from the body if you hurt yourself or
whatever you're gonna get a pain signal
or a pleasure signal
but for the most part it's a top-down
system
read lisa feldman barrett's book
how emotions are made that book flips
all of this on its head and what it
explains is that it's basically an
extrapolation
of the fact that the vagus nerve 80 of
the data that it sends is from the body
to the brain only 20 from the brain to
the body
think about that and that emotions start
in the body so a big part of
self-awareness is
getting in your body feeling your body
figuring out how a an emotion
manifests itself does it do you start to
get flush
do you feel jittery are you anxious are
you angry
beginning to identify the sensations in
your body because the way
emotions are made you get a feeling in
your body
your body then maps that feeling on to
what was happening
the last time that you felt that oh the
last time you felt like that you were
angry the last time you felt like that
you were scared the last time you felt
like that you were in love whatever
and your body tries to map or your brain
tries to map that body sensation
onto a familiar state and then once it
goes ah yeah i know that this is fear
boom all the responses that come with
fear
and you go and so one of the ways that
people talk about anxiety
at a physiological level anxiety
looks very similar to excitement and so
one of the loops that a cognitive
behavioral therapist for instance would
tell you to do
is to go oh i know this feeling this is
excitement
not oh i know this feeling i'm super
anxious oh i know this feeling this is
excitement
and you constantly work to reframe that
feeling as excitement now the
super weird thing is it works
your brain actually believes what you
tell it
so your brain is quite literally coming
up with
a backwards compatible story to try to
make sense of the feeling
but it also allows you to put a
conscious reinterpretation
on top of that feeling so now
you're able to go oh this isn't anxiety
this is excitement i feel that what's
coming is going to be
fun it's going to be exciting and that's
why my heart is beating faster that's
why my breath is getting more shallow
because i'm super excited to go do this
thing
now when you first start doing it of
course it sounds like bs
and you're calling yourself out on it
but if you repeat it and you go through
that process
enough it really does begin to come true
the next part of the equation is just
getting really good
at identifying the signal that your
body's sending you so instead of
mapping it to sort of you know four or
five really basic primary emotions
fear excitement joy
sadness whatever like those really sort
of primary colors of emotion
we get into a layer deeper and we start
beginning to identify oh i get
this is i'm feeling flustered
why am i feeling flustered oh they they
um
they're saying that i'm short and i'm
insecure about my height
so oh man this isn't me that i dislike
them this is that
they're tapping into my insecurity and i
will just tell you
in a marriage like realizing that
90 of the arguments you get into you
think they're about a cup of tea
or about the kids or let's stick with
the kids money that's another huge one
you think you're arguing about money
let's say
but really what's happening is you're
afraid that you can't pay the bills
or you're afraid that when they say that
they're worried that you're not going to
be able to pay the bills that what
they're saying is you don't make enough
money
and that they told you you should have
gone in to talk to your boss to ask for
a raise or you should be working harder
you should have quit that job a long
time ago and gone somewhere else
and so now you get this flustered
feeling
because they're triggering an insecurity
but what usually happens is people just
lash out and you start arguing
about the paying the bill but this isn't
about paying the bill this is about how
you feel about your job and what you
think they're judging you
about not having a higher paying job
people get into those death loops all
the time
the biggest argument my wife and i ever
got into
was over a cup of tea
over a cup of tea we got into this huge
screaming match
it almost ended our vacation what little
vacation we had at that time
and i remember thinking this is crazy
like we are legitimately yelling at each
other we are about to turn the car
around on the freeway and go home
and not go to our vacation over a cup of
tea
and so finally we just said all right
hold on hold on
what are we really fighting about and
that was the beginning of realizing my
body sends me a signal it's making me
agitated
i blanket interpret this as oh i'm angry
why am i angry oh because
they wasted time having this cup of tea
when in reality it was this way deeper
thing about
respect and i felt like
she wasn't understanding how important
it was to me
to have taken time off to go on this
vacation to spend money we were so poor
to spend money on a hotel so i wanted to
be there
the second they would let us into that
room to feel like i was getting the most
out of my money
and for her she's like oh my god i'm
finally heard and understood that we're
going on vacation he's giving me some of
his time
and so i'm gonna start my day out with a
cup of tea and just
bask in you know going slow and not you
know being hard charging for a minute
but we weren't understanding each other
and so we had this huge blow up over the
t
so beginning to identify in real time my
body's telling me something
i don't want to shove it into this
primary basket of emotion i want to
figure out what's really going on
that some egregious percentage of the
time it's somebody's triggered an
insecurity about something you're not
feeling respected you're not feeling
loved you're not feeling smart they make
you feel
dumb make you feel poor whatever you
have your insecurities around
and when you can actually talk about
those insecurities now things begin to
unlock
but it begins with that process of i
feel something in my body
what is it put a name to it make it as
nuanced as possible and then articulate
it out loud
when you start doing that enough all of
a sudden you're able to get to that
very quickly and that will change the
game
let's talk about athletic greens the
all-in-one daily drink to
support better health and peak
performance with so many stressors in
life it's difficult to maintain
effective nutritional habits and
give our bodies the nutrients it needs
to thrive
busy schedules poor sleep exercise
stress or simply not
eating enough of the foods that your
body needs
that's where athletic greens can help
their daily drink is like nutritional
insurance for your body that's delivered
straight to your
door develop from a complex blend of 75
vitamins minerals and whole foods
sourced ingredients
athletic greens is a greens powder
engineered to help fill the nutritional
gaps in your diet
athletic greens continues to obsessively
improve this
one holistic formula based on the latest
research
producing 53 iterations over the last
decade
and counting it's lifestyle friendly
whether you eat keto
paleo vegan dairy-free or gluten-free
and contains less than one gram of sugar
without compromising on taste
so many people on our team at impact
theory are talking all about their
experiences with athletic greens
they love the taste and how they can get
the micro micronutrients from various
veggies
without having to cook or buy groceries
so when our marketing associate
chase is busy and he knows he's not
going to be able to easily eat any
greens
he can bring along athletic greens and
make sure that he's still
getting adequate micronutrients from the
powder
without having to eat an entire farm's
worth of a salad
so whether you're looking for peak
performance or better health
covering your bases with athletic greens
makes investing in your energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty
and efficient so whether you're looking
for peak performance or better health
covering your bases with athletic greens
makes investing in your energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty and efficient and right now
athletic greens is
doubling down on supporting your immune
system during the winter months
they're offering our audience a free one
year supply of vitamin d and five
travel packs with your first purchase
simply visit
athleticgreens.com impact theory
again that's athleticgreens.com
impact theory and get your free one year
supply of vitamin d
and five free travel packs today
all right guys give it a shot take care
and be legendary
next dear tom many people around me are
struggling with negative
self-deprecating thoughts and
self-narratives and nothing i do
or say for them seems to reach them they
are
so used to being miserable and depressed
all the time that they are unconsciously
blocking away the good in life so my
question is
what should i do with people who refuse
to let go of their negativity
they are close friends and family
members so i just can't cut ties
with them but being with them is really
draining
thank you in advance for your brilliant
answer and wish you and your team
all the best all right
the super bummer news that i have for
you
is while i have the right answer
i don't know that it's the super genius
answer that you want
one of the goals of my life is to get to
the point where
in 30 seconds or less i can change the
course of somebody's life
through magic words
for lack of a better way to think of it
and i'm really trying
and it won't give up but as of right now
the only solution that i have when you
love somebody
that is stuck in negativity
is what i call just sit
if i know i'm going to spend time with
them and i can't break them out of their
negative ways
then i'm just gonna sit and be with them
and i'm gonna love them
and i'm gonna make sure that they know
that i love them and
i'll live my life without judgment
without needing them to change without
um trying to preach to them i'm just
gonna be with them and find things that
we can talk about that's fun
um there's almost always something that
even the most
negative person loves and if you can
find that thing
fishing card collecting hawaii
whatever somebody's thing is whatever it
is that they like to talk about
and you get them onto that subject
you'll actually have fun it's really
surprising
my my dad's wife is way into quilting
now i can't tell you how not into
quilting
i am but she's really passionate about
it
and having a conversation with her about
quilting is so
interesting because she's so passionate
and whenever
you can get somebody on to something
that they're passionate about whether
they're
a positive person or a negative person
it gets to be a pretty fun place
so i just sit i try to find things that
they're going to be excited to talk
about
and my whole goal is to make them feel
loved where they're at
now i live my life the way i'm going to
live it i don't join them in negativity
i don't you know go in on those
conversations but i don't want them to
feel
judged i don't want to put distance
between us you know there's nothing
worse than making somebody that you love
and care about feel judged which of
course i
was by even though i was just trying to
help i didn't want to see them suffer
anymore
in constantly trying like saying hey
you're doing this wrong like there's a
better way you'll be happier
it just made them feel judged and it was
putting tremendous distance between me
and somebody that i cared about
so it works it will work
every time but you have to let go and
know that
they're going to suffer until they're
ready to change
you can't want it for them much to my
dismay
right next up i previously used
negativity as fuel to achieve my goals
i.e doing things that others
didn't believe i could do although this
was a very effective tool i ultimately
felt dissatisfied when i reached these
goals
i am trying now to use passion to fuel
my goals but
find that it is a less effective driving
force
have i just not found something that i'm
passionate enough about
or is negativity truly a powerful tool
if so is there a way of reframing the
negativity such that i can use it
without feeling dissatisfied at the end
okay
so yes yes
there is the dark side and there is the
light side of the force
and the dark side has its place
but you have to be very careful you
cannot use them in equilibrium
i have found in my own life that it's
about 80
20. 80 of my time i spend focused on the
beautiful things that i want to create
the amazing things the the mission that
i'm on how i want to help other people
right i talked about goals being
exciting to you and honorable
so they uplift you and other people
and i try to spend as much time as i can
there
and that's gotten me through a lot of
difficult times to think about the
people i'm trying to serve to think
about the way that i'm going to help
people
we end every team meeting at impact
theory with
a connection to our communities whether
it's playing a video of somebody who's
changed their life
or reading a letter that somebody's
written us about how
the content that we create has moved
them forward in some meaningful way and
they're beautiful and it's amazing it
feels
so good but
there are times where i'm so fatigued
there's a great quote by vince lombardi
fatigue
makes cowards of us all
and there are times where i'm so
fatigued
all the beautiful things in the world
are not enough to keep me going
and i'm just done i'm spent i'm in
i'm past the day david goggins 40
where he says when you think you're
broken and couldn't possibly go another
step you're only forty percent of the
way there
okay the beautiful things will get me
past that hurdle
but when you're actually eighty percent
of the way there ninety percent of the
way there
really close to being fully spent
the thing that i lean on in that moment
is the dark side the people that want me
to fail
the people that are on my list as i call
it
there are people that have tried to trip
me up
that want to see me lose that
come at me go behind my back whatever
and i put them on a list
and i never think about the list more
than 20 of the time because that's a
dark place to be
but when i'm really tired
and i'm in danger of cowardice
i think about those people and it's
an ugly energy but damn
is it powerful to say i'm not going to
let them win
i will as david goggins says take
their souls
and it's really powerful and it's one of
those things that i often get pushed
back on because
it is ugly to say that i think about
these people and i think about
destroying them and beating them
and outperforming them in every way and
dunking in their face and doing better
than them in life and watching them
just get demolished by my performance
but it's motivating and it works
now if you spend too much time there you
slide into bitterness you slide into
anger it's resentment it's all about
them
but man let me tell you if you get that
balance right 80 20
90 10 man it's
it's really profoundly powerful
there is a reason that evolution has
given you
anger there's a reason that evolution
has given you
rage there is a reason that evolution
righteous indignation
you know you hear these apocryphal
stories of a woman lifts a car off her
baby
and i think the reason that we all
believe it whether it's true or not
is you know what that energy amplitude
is like
when you're just enraged with somebody
and you refuse to back down and you're
right
and they're wrong
i used to when i first started working
out in the gym and i hated every second
of it
i used to imagine somebody attacking my
wife
and the rage that inspired in me allowed
me to push myself in the gym
and i would say the problem
isn't that it's a powerful energy the
prob
it only becomes a problem when you spend
too much time there
so the the short answer to your question
is
use it but never more than 20 and if you
also have that huge basket of resources
to draw on
of things you love and people you want
to help and you know all the great
things that you can bring into the world
if you keep pushing
you will be fine so don't be afraid to
leverage it don't over leverage it
i love that question all right
six last one i currently study at a
prestigious school in my country
after i finally finished high school my
problem with negativity
has to do with this school since the day
i got enrolled i'm full of negativity
and self-doubt which led me to
squandering most of the scholar year
my brain somehow finds ways to trick me
and keep me unmotivated and negative all
the time
it's really depressing to be like this
and stuck in a rut if you could help me
overcome this curse of negativity i
truly appreciate it and thanks a million
for your efforts all right
homie when i say i have the silver
bullet for this one this
this is the magic genius answer that
people were looking for on the other one
here it goes you do not need to think
that you are anything special
it is absolutely okay for you to be
hopelessly average why
to me the most powerful thing that you
could believe about yourself
is that you're the average human now why
i actually think it is
less powerful for you to think that you
are above average
because to think that you are above
average means you are valuing yourself
for being better than people it's a
super vulnerable position to be in
because
you will inevitably meet people who are
better than you and what do you do with
your ego then then it's really crushing
you thought you were the man and now you
encounter somebody that's better than
you they slap you around they outperform
you they dunk on you whatever
and now whoa like you've got to rebuild
and claw your way back
versus saying the following
the average human is the ultimate
adaptation machine
as a species humans have chosen
to respond to cultural and environmental
cues
so we do not come pre-programmed like a
horse that comes out of the womb
10 minutes later it's ready to rock and
roll it's running around doing all the
things that a horse can do
a human on the other hand has this huge
period of development after birth
where we cannot take care of ourselves
we can't walk can't hold our own head up
we in our pants
it's crazy but
what that does is it allows us to drink
in this
the environment that we're born into and
adapt so the average human is the
ultimate adaptation machine therefore
being the average human means
you're a learner that's it you're not
exceptional so
you're not putting any of your
psychology your
self-worth your pride into being better
than somebody else
it all comes down to valuing yourself
for being the learner
so hey cool you wasted a bunch of time
at school no reason to hide from that
it was a waste we're not going to repeat
the mistake but we learned
so you've got the self-awareness to see
that it was a mistake now it's just like
what do you want to do
what do you want to get great at because
if you apply yourself
even if you're not good yet
you can get good how do i know that
because you're the average human and the
average human is the ultimate adaptation
machine
this is all about disciplined focused
energy into acquiring a skill set
it's what i call the only belief that
matters when you believe
the time and energy directed at
something through deliberate practice
will actually make you better at that
thing
now all of a sudden it's like i can get
good at anything if i apply myself
and now all of a sudden your behaviors
align with your belief
that's why that belief matters so much
because if you don't think you can get
better at something
then why would you apply any time and
energy to it and if you don't apply time
and energy to it then you really won't
get any better
so it becomes this loop of well i
believe i can get better therefore i try
therefore i actually get better
therefore i try harder
and you get in this virtuous cycle
this is hugely important that is one of
those things that will govern the rest
of your life you value yourself for
learning getting better at something and
applying yourself
everything else will take care of itself
because you just keep applying yourself
don't make excuses don't be asked
yourself if you wasted time you wasted
time don't
spend your time beating yourself up over
it because we only do and believe that
which moves us towards our goals right
we talked about that earlier
so we're going to do and believe that
which moves us towards our goal
and in this case that is the belief that
we can get good at anything
now there's an incredible quote i love
this quote so much
you can't make a racehorse out of a pig
but you can make a really fast pig
your life can be the answer to what does
a fast pig look like that is certainly
what my life is
all the success that i've had in my life
is not because i was gifted at any one
thing when i left for college my mother
quietly
assumed i was going to fail my best
friend assumed i was going to
marshmallow my way through life
when i asked my father-in-law for his
blessing to marry his daughter he said
no and yet i went on to
be successful to earn my father-in-law's
respect
um not because they misidentified me
because they didn't they were right but
because i developed
drive i got the only belief that
mattered and i finally realized that
humans are meant to grow and get better
at something and i just have to apply
myself
and the same is true for you decide what
you want to get good at
and go after it with everything you've
got and that my friends is how you
overcome negativity
all right guys do not let negativity
hold you back you were in complete
control
victor frankel was in a concentration
camp he said between stimulus
in response there is a gap you choose
how to respond in that gap
the negativity will arise almost
certainly forever
but when that negative voice presents
itself how you respond
is up to you all right guys that's it go
out
kill it make your life what you want it
to be and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
hey everybody thank you so much for
watching if you haven't already be sure
to smash that subscribe button and hit
the bell notification so you never
miss a thing until next time my friends
be legendary take care
you